But how intrinsic, how automatic is language? Is it like eating and sleeping, or is it to some extent a learned skill. It’s really a kind of “nature vs nurture” question, a kind of question that has beguiled and fascinated scientists and philosophers since time began. And it’s not often that nature affords us an opportunity to investigate.
In the midst of the craziness of the French revolution, a young boy was discovered in the forests of the south-eastern Massif Central – one of the wildest and least inhabited regions in Europe. It appeared that the boy had been living alone and like an animal for some years. Feral children have fascinated philosophers for centuries, offering a window into human nature untainted by society’s strictures, and in doing so revealing how language might be formed. Finding a real life feral child was nothing short of sensational. He was captured and ended up in Paris under the innovative doctor Jean Marc Hitard who was working at the recently established institute for deaf mutes. The boy, whom they named Victor, having experienced almost nothing of society and no education, was considered something of a blank slate. Most significantly, he was unable to speak, suggesting that language was not just genetic, it needs to be learnt from others. For the next five years Hitard devoted himself to Victor – he taught him how to eat, how to use the toilet, how to restrain his animal urges (in particular with the female inmates once he’d reached puberty), and, of course, how to speak French.
Victor’s vocal chords, like any muscle unused to exercise, needed training. And just as a baby learns to babble, so Victor started to learn to articulate sounds. Despite remaining in Hitard’s care until his death, aged 42, Victor never learned to talk. The reasons why were never established, perhaps it was a congenital defect, or psychological trauma, or perhaps Victor simply started to learn too late.
The trouble is cases like Victor make for a messy scientific study, because, by definition, with all feral children their backgrounds are unclear. What seems certain is that there is a window for language acquisition which closes around about early puberty, say, and after that it’s much more difficult to acquire language. Of course, we do, as we often learn foreign languages, but, as most of us can testify, it becomes a lot more difficult as our brain loses plasticity. One thing, though, is certain – by the age of 5, most of us will have acquired the gift of language.
